Add 64bit interpreter review (#752)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2024-03-20-#29221.md

In this example, we are going to assume we are doing math on 1,000 BTC. In satoshis, this number is 100,000,000,000.
Encoded as [CScriptNum](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/1105aa46dd1008c556b8c435f1efcb9be09a1644/src/script/script.h#L225) the hex representation for 1,000 BTC is `0x00e8764817`

0x00e8764817 0x00e8764817 OP_ADD 0x00d0ed902e OP_EQUALVERIFY

```
[Stack: ] --(0x00e8764817)--> [Stack: 0x00e8764817] --(0x00e8764817)--> [Stack: 0x00e8764817, 0x00e8764817] --(OP_ADD)--> [Stack: OP_ADD ERROR]
```

Explanation:

1. The initial state of the stack is empty.
2. `0x00e8764817` pushes the hexadecimal value 0x00e8764817 onto the stack.
3. `0x00e8764817` pushes another instance of the same value onto the stack.
4. OP_ADD consumes the two top stack elements and FAILS with an [overflow exception](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/1105aa46dd1008c556b8c435f1efcb9be09a1644/src/script/script.h#L248)

This [version fails because OP_ADD can only consume 4 byte inputs](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/1105aa46dd1008c556b8c435f1efcb9be09a1644/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L961).

> Even worse, this does not give the Script programmer to handle the exception thrown by CScriptNum.

Reviewer: ?
```suggestion
Even worse, this does not give the Script programmer the ability to handle the exception thrown by CScriptNum.
```

### Example: Adding 1,000 BTC together with OP_ADD64

Here's the same example from above with `OP_ADD64` rather than `OP_ADD` with our new little endian encoding format rather than `CScriptNum`:

0x000e876481700000 0x000e876481700000 OP_ADD64 0x001d0ed902e00000 OP_EQUALVERIFY

```
[Stack: ] --(0x00e8764817000000)--> [Stack: 0x00e8764817000000]
           --(0x00e8764817000000)--> [Stack: 0x00e8764817000000, 0x00e8764817000000]
           --(OP_ADD64)--> [Stack: 0x01d0ed902e000000, true]
```

Explanation:

1. The initial state of the stack is empty.
2. `0x00e8764817000000` pushes the hexadecimal value `0x00e8764817000000` onto the stack (representing 100,000,000,000 satoshis).
3. Another instance of `0x00e8764817000000` is pushed onto the stack.
4. `OP_ADD64` attempts to pop the top two elements (`0x00e8764817000000` and `0x00e8764817000000`) to add them. The correct result of the addition `0x01d0ed902e000000` (representing 200,000,000,000 satoshis) is pushed onto the stack first, followed by `true`, indicating that the arithmetic executed correctly.

## Design questions

### Signed vs unsigned arithmetic

> When implementing this PR, i pulled most code over from the [elements blockchain](https://github.com/ElementsProject/elements/). In elements they implemented new arithmetic opcodes as fixed size 64 bit signed integers.

Reviewer: I recommend using third person
```suggestion
Much of the implementation uses code from the [elements blockchain](https://github.com/ElementsProject/elements/). In elements they implemented new arithmetic opcodes as fixed size 64 bit signed integers.
```

```

Explanation:

1. The initial state of the stack is empty.
2. `0x00e8764817000000` pushes the hexadecimal value `0x00e8764817000000` onto the stack (representing 100,000,000,000 satoshis).
3. Another instance of `0x00e8764817000000` is pushed onto the stack.
4. `OP_ADD64` attempts to pop the top two elements (`0x00e8764817000000` and `0x00e8764817000000`) to add them. The correct result of the addition `0x01d0ed902e000000` (representing 200,000,000,000 satoshis) is pushed onto the stack first, followed by `true`, indicating that the arithmetic executed correctly.
5. `OP_DROP` drops the `true` pushed onto the stack by OP_ADD64 indicating the arithmetic operation was successfull.
6. `0x001d0ed902e00000` pushes the hexadecimal value `0x001d0ed902e00000` onto the stack (representing 200,000,000,000 satoshis).
7. `OP_EQUAL` compares the two top stack values `0x001d0ed902e00000` and pushes `true` onto the stack

## Design questions

### Signed vs unsigned arithmetic

Much of the implementation uses code from the [elements blockchain](https://github.com/ElementsProject/elements/). In elements they implemented new arithmetic opcodes as fixed size 64 bit signed integers.

> Do we have a use case for using signed math rather than unsigned math? My satoshi example would work with unsigned math (outputs can't have negative value) even though sats are encoded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do we have a use case for using signed math rather than unsigned math? The satoshi example would work with unsigned math (outputs can't have negative value) even though sats are encoded
```

as `int64_t` in the bitcoin protocol. Signed integer overflow is [undefined behavior in the cpp spec](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/ub)

### Existing opcode interop

> What is the best way to interop with existing op codes such as `OP_WITHIN`, `OP_SIZE`, `OP_CHECKSIGADD`, etc? There are two ways to handle this AFAIK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is the best way to interop with existing op codes such as `OP_WITHIN`, `OP_SIZE`, `OP_CHECKSIGADD`, etc? They may be explicitly or implicitly converted:
```

#### Explicit conversion op codes

> Elements, and as a by product this PR implement explicit casting op codes. They are `OP_SCRIPTNUMTOLE64`, `OP_LE64TOSCRIPTNUM`, `OP_LE32TOLE64`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elements and, as a by product, this PR implement explicit casting op codes. They are `OP_SCRIPTNUMTOLE64`, `OP_LE64TOSCRIPTNUM`, `OP_LE32TOLE64`.
```

```
0x000e876481700000 0x000e876481700000 OP_ADD64 OP_DROP OP_LE64TOSCRIPTNUM OP_SIZE OP_8 OP_EQUALVERIFY OP_SCRIPTNUMTOLE64 0x001d0ed902e00000 OP_EQUAL
```

#### Implicit conversion opcodes

You could redefine opcodes such as `OP_WITHIN`, `OP_SIZE`, `OP_CHECKSIGADD` to be context dependent on the SigVersion. Lets look at a potential implementation for `OP_SIZE`

```c++
case OP_SIZE:
{
    // (in -- in size)
    if (stack.size() < 1)
        return set_error(serror, SCRIPT_ERR_INVALID_STACK_OPERATION);

    if (sigversion == SigVersion::BASE || sigversion == SigVersion::WITNESS_V0 || sigversion == SigVersion::TAPROOT || sigversion == SigVersion::TAPSCRIPT) {
	//this is for backwards compatability, we always want to use the old numbering
	//system for already deployed versions of the bitcoin protocol
        CScriptNum bn(stacktop(-1).size());
        stack.push_back(bn.getvch());
    } else {
        // All future soft forks assume 64-bit math.
        // Don't push variable length encodings onto
        // the stack when we are using SigVersion::TAPSCRIPT_64BIT.
        int64_t result = stacktop(-1).size();
        push8_le(stack, result);
    }
}
```

> The key here is the `else` clause which assumes that every `SigVersion` that is NOT especified in the `if` clause uses 64bit signed integer fixed length numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key here is the `else` clause which assumes that every `SigVersion` that is NOT specified in the `if` clause uses 64bit signed integer fixed length numbers.
```

This removes the need for conversion/casting op codes and makes the developer experience much nicer, IMO.

### Encoding debate

There is a debate ongoing along 2 dimensions

1. Whether fixed size encodings will encumber us for features introduced in future soft forks (such as 256bit scalar arithmetic)

> 2. Moving away from `CScriptNum` will be too disruptive to the ecosystem and force everyone to update their tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Whether moving away from `CScriptNum` will be too disruptive to the ecosystem and force everyone to update their tooling.
```
